Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to analyse an
algorithm.
Generally, two major factors are used to analyse any algorithm.
One is time,
that is how much time an algorithm takes to produce
the desired output and the second one is space,
that is how much memory space the algorithm consumes to
produce the desired output.
So first, let us understand how to analyse the time
complexity of an algorithm.
So the time complexity of an algorithm depends on various
factors such as machine architecture that his whether a machine
is a 32 bit architecture or a 64 bit architecture,
then on the processor that the machine has that
is a machine can have a single core processor or
multicore processor.
Then it depends on the execution type that is
the machine can execute instructions one by one sequentially or
it can execute multiple instructions parallelly.
Then the time complexity depends on the machine's memory access
time.
That is how fast a machine can read or write data
to or from the memory and the last one is what
input we're giving to a particular algorithm.
And when we analyse the time complexity of an algorithm
we do not bother about all these factors such as
machine architecture, processor, its execution et cetra.
Because these are machine dependent factors which
may vary from machine to machine.
So in general we analyse the time complexity of an
algorithm based on the given input, that is for a given
input how much time and space the algorithm takes to
produce the desired output.
And every machine is unique in its own way.
Some machines can have sequential execution, and some other machines
can have parallel execution and we can't analyse the algorithm
for every individual machine
So let us first built our model machine to analyse
the algorithms and our model machine will have these
features,
It is say 32 bit
architecture machine, it has a single core processor,
it will execute instructions sequentially that is one after one
manner and it takes one unit of time for the
basic operations like read, write, assignment and return statements.
For example, the instruction int i equal to zero takes one
unit of time and the statement return
zero also takes one unit of time. So these kind
of basic operations will take one unit of time and
to make the analysing even simpler we can make the
assumption that every simple statement takes one unit of time.
For example this is a statement with three assignments but
still we can assume it takes one unit time as
it is a simple statement.
Say another statement here.
Here we have multiple arithmetic operations but again by
our assumption it takes one unit of time,
similarly this statement will also take one unit of time,
so that is our model machine.
Now let us analyse the time and space complexity of
the swapping algorithm with our model machine.
First let us talk about the time complexity.
First we have temp equal to a and this is
a simple statement.
Hence it takes one unit of time,
next statement is a equal to b again
it is a simple assignment statement, so it also takes
one unit of time.
The third statement is b equal to temp again
it will take one unit of time.
So what is the total time taken? It is
t of x equal to one plus one plus one.
That is the time complexity function t of x equal to 3,
which means whatever may be the value of x
the t of x function will remain in some constant
value.
See this graph, for every value of x the
t of x t(x) value remains constant. So we can call this
algorithm as a "Constant time algorithm".
So the time complexity of the swapping algorithm is
order of 1 O(1), which means the time complexity does not depend
on the given input
in this algorithm. It will remain constant for any given
input.
In general we used this Big O notation to represent the
time complexity.
But we also have other notations like theta, omega et cetra.
We will learn about them in the coming lessons.
So that was the time complexity.
Now let us discuss about the space complexity, in the
swap function
we have two parameters, variables a and b. So let us say,
a takes one unit of memory and b also takes
one unit of memory.
Then in the first statement we have temp equal to a
that is there is a new variable other than a and b
and it will also take one unit of memory and
the next statement a equal to b,
and we have already taken a and b so there
is no issue,
and next we have b equal to temp again
both b and temp are already considered so that's all.
So the total memory taken by this swap algorithm is
one plus one plus one that is three units of
memory.
So space complexity s of x s(x) is equal to 3 which
is also a constant.
So this algorithm takes only a fixed amount of memory
and the space complexity is order of one O(1).
So that was the time and space complexity and analysis
of the swapping algorithm which is a very simple
algorithm.
And we got time and space complexity is equal to
order of one O(1).
We will discuss more complex algorithms and its analysis in
the coming videos.